chore(ADR): Proposal to add flag type (#1746)
open-feature/flagd: docs/architecture-decisions/flag-type.md

* **API Extension with Explicit Flag Type:** Introduce an optional `flagType`property to the flag definition to serve as the single source for type validation.

## Proposal

This proposal is to extend the flag definition with an optional `flagType`property. This approach is chosen over simply aligning the `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` validation because it addresses the root cause of the type inconsistency and provides a more robust, long-term solution.

By introducing an explicit `flagType`field, it establishes a single source of truth for the flag's type, independent of its variants. This allows for early and consistent type validation during flag definition parsing, preventing type-related errors at runtime.

The new `flagType`field will be optional to maintain backward compatibility with existing flag configurations. If the field is omitted, `flagd` will treat the flag as having `object`, and no type validation will be performed against the `defaultVariant`. When the `flagType`field is present, `flagd` will enforce that all variants of the flag conform to the specified type.

This change will make the behavior of `flagd` more predictable and reliable.

### API changes

> The `flagd` flag definition will be updated to include an optional `flagType`property. This property will be a string enum with the following possible values: `"boolean"`, `"string"`, `"integer"`, `"float"`, and `"object"`. This aligns with the OpenFeature CLI and the flag manifest schema.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure it's a good idea to differentiate between float/int for this purpose. A couple reasons:

- I think we could easily write a JSON schema to enforce that flags with `"flagType":boolean` only have variants of type boolean, and `"flagType":string` flags only have variants of type string, etc, etc... but I don't think we can enforce that ints are ints and not floats (we might be able to do this with [multipleOf](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/numeric#multiples) but I'd like to see a PoC first).
- Our providers don't care about float/int as it is; they convert instead of indicating a type error.

Very interested in other thoughts on this.

Reviewer 2: The main reason to have both `float` and `int` is to match the flag manifest used in the OpenFeature cli. I think it's important to keep them in sync. However, we may need to support casting from at least int to float.

Reviewer 3: I don't have enough contexts and knowledge to form a mature opinion for OpenFeature spec.... I guess we could explore the extension in flagd and OFREP first and we'll learn more about the feasibility. For now, I think drawing the boundary and aligning on the

The root cause of this issue is the absence of a dedicated, authoritative type definition for the flag itself. Instead, the type is inferred from the `defaultVariant` or API itself (`T` from `Resolve<T>`) , which is not always a reliable source of truth for all possible variants. This problem is getting worse by the planned support for code-defined defaults (as detailed in the [Support Code Default ADR](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/docs/architecture-decisions/support-code-default.md)), which allows the `defaultVariant` to be `null`. This makes it impossible to resolve the flag's type from the `defaultVariant`, increasing the risk of runtime errors.

## Requirements

* The new `flagdType`field in the flag definition must be optional to ensure backward compatibility.

> * If the `flagdType`field is present, `flagd` must validate that all variant values of the flag conform to this type during initialization.

Reviewer 3: This is only being validated on the schema level and flagd binary/provider does not know the exact type of the schema validation error.

* The `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` methods must use the `flagdType`field for validation when it is available.
* The implementation must be consistent with the OpenFeature specification and the flag manifest schema.

## Considered Options

* **Consistent `defaultVariant` Validation:** Align the behavior of `Resolve<T>` with `ResolveAll` by making `Resolve<T>` validate the evaluated variant against the type of the `defaultVariant`.
* **API Extension with Explicit Flag Type:** Introduce an optional `flagdType`property to the flag definition to serve as the single source for type validation.

## Proposal

This proposal is to extend the flag definition with an optional `flagdType`property. This approach is chosen over simply aligning the `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` validation because it addresses the root cause of the type inconsistency and provides a more robust, long-term solution.

By introducing an explicit `flagdType`field, it establishes a single source of truth for the flag's type, independent of its variants. This allows for early and consistent type validation during flag definition parsing, preventing type-related errors at runtime.

> The new `flagdType`field will be optional to maintain backward compatibility with existing flag configurations. If the field is omitted, `flagd` will treat the flag as having `object`, and no type validation will be performed against the `defaultVariant`. When the `flagdType`field is present, `flagd` will enforce that all variants of the flag conform to the specified type.

Author: That's why this ADR appeared - there are no single source of true of what is the expected behavior of Resolve methods with different scenarios.

Based on current schema and implementation flag is being validated against schema and if variants don't conform with type, i.e. they have different types, the validation is just throws **warning** (**not error**) and flagd binary/provider does not know the exact type of the schema validation error.

It means current schema allows user to have flags with different types.

The main idea of this ADR is to set explicitly which type should be expected and used for validation and resolcing the variant. 
But I understand the concern regarding the case when the type is ommited. 

I envision 3 oprions:
1. Fall back to infer type from variants (proposed by  @guidobrei) - but what if variants have different types - it's not obviouse which of them needs to be taken into resolving
2. Fall back to infer from defaultVariant  [current implementation] (proposed by @tangenti ) - it has 2 issues: first, when it's null, second, inconsistency between ResolveAll and Resolve<T> in bug #1481.
3. Proposed option in this ADR is to treat such flags as `object` - it changes the existing behavior, but the behavior anyway needs to be fixed eigher by this ADR or by fixing the bug #1481. And IMO this approach is more transparent: if you have type defined for your flag - it will check variants against it, otherwise we allow any types.

cc @beeme1mr @toddbaert

---
status: proposed
author: @andreyturkov
created: 2025-08-14
updated: 2025-08-14
---

# Extending Flag Definition with a Type Property

## Background

Currently, `flagd` has inconsistent behavior in type validation between its `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` API methods. The `Resolve<T>` method validates the evaluated flag variant against the type `T` requested by the client, while `ResolveAll` validates it against the type of the `defaultVariant` specified in the flag's definition. This discrepancy can lead to situations where a flag evaluation succeeds with one method but fails with the other, depending on the evaluation context and the variant returned. This inconsistent behavior is further detailed in bug report #1481.

The root cause of this issue is the absence of a dedicated, authoritative type definition for the flag itself. Instead, the type is inferred from the `defaultVariant` or API itself (`T` from `Resolve<T>`) , which is not always a reliable source of truth for all possible variants. This can lead to unexpected errors and make it difficult for developers to debug their feature flags.

> 

Author: done

## Requirements

> * The new `type` field in the flag definition must be optional to ensure backward compatibility.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to use `flagType` so that it matches what we defined in the [flag manifest](https://github.com/open-feature/cli/blob/main/schema/v0/flag-manifest.json) used by the OpenFeature CLI.

Author: done

> * If the `type` field is present, `flagd` must validate that all variants of the flag conform to this type during initialization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the `type` field is present, `flagd` must validate that all variant values of the flag conform to this type during initialization.
```

* **API Extension with Explicit Flag Type:** Introduce an optional `type` property to the flag definition to serve as the authoritative source for type validation.

## Proposal

This proposal is to extend the flag definition with an optional `type` property. This approach is chosen over simply aligning the `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` validation because it addresses the root cause of the type inconsistency and provides a more robust, long-term solution.

By introducing an explicit `type` field, it establishes a single source of truth for the flag's type, independent of its variants. This allows for early and consistent type validation during flag definition parsing, preventing type-related errors at runtime.

The new `type` field will be optional to maintain backward compatibility with existing flag configurations. If the field is omitted, `flagd` will treat the flag as having `object`, and no type validation will be performed against the `defaultVariant`. When the `type` field is present, `flagd` will enforce that all variants of the flag conform to the specified type.

This change will make the behavior of `flagd` more predictable and reliable.

### API changes

> The `flagd` flag definition will be updated to include an optional `type` property. This property will be a string enum with the following possible values: `"boolean"`, `"string"`, `"number"`, and `"object"`.

Reviewer 2: The OpenFeature CLI defines `float`, `integer`, `object`, `string`, and `boolean`. We should probably keep them in sync but I'd like to get others thoughts on this.

      "title": "Flag Type",
      "description": "The type of the flag. If specified, all variants must conform to this type.",
      "type": "string",
      "enum": [
        "boolean",
        "string",
        "number",
        "object"
      ]
    },
    "state": {
      ...
    },
    ...
  }
}
```

2.  The `booleanFlag`, `stringFlag`, `numberFlag`, and `objectFlag` definitions will be updated to enforce the `type` property:

```json
"booleanFlag": {
  "allOf": [
    {
      "$ref": "#/definitions/flag"
    },
    {
      "$ref": "#/definitions/booleanVariants"
    },
    {
      "properties": {
        "type": {
          "const": "boolean"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Similar changes will be made to `stringFlag`, `numberFlag`, and `objectFlag` to enforce their respective types.

### Consequences

#### The good
* It improves the reliability and predictability of flag evaluations.
* It allows for early error detection of type mismatches.
* It improves the developer experience by making the API more explicit.

#### The bad
* It adds a new field to the flag definition, which developers need to be aware of.
* It requires updating all `flagd` SDKs to support the new field.

> * It requires updating flag manifest schema

Author: Nope, removed

This discrepancy can lead to situations where a flag evaluation succeeds with one method but fails with the other, depending on the evaluation context and the variant returned.
This inconsistent behavior is further detailed in bug report #1481.

The root cause of this issue is the absence of a dedicated, authoritative type definition for the flag itself.
Instead, the type is inferred from the `defaultVariant` or API itself (`T` from `Resolve<T>`), which is not always a reliable source of truth for all possible variants.
This problem is getting worse by the planned support for code-defined defaults (as detailed in the [Support Code Default ADR](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/docs/architecture-decisions/support-code-default.md)), which allows the `defaultVariant` to be `null`.
This makes it impossible to resolve the flag's type from the `defaultVariant`, increasing the risk of runtime errors.

## Requirements

* The new `flagType`field in the flag definition must be optional to ensure backward compatibility.

> * If the `flagType`field is present, `flagd` must validate that all variant values of the flag conform to this type during initialization.

Reviewer: I _believe_ we could even validate this in the JSON schema with some backwards compatible changes to the definition: https://flagd.dev/schema/v0/flags.json

* The `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` methods must use the `flagdType`field for validation when it is available.
* The implementation must be consistent with the OpenFeature specification and the flag manifest schema.

## Considered Options

* **Consistent `defaultVariant` Validation:** Align the behavior of `Resolve<T>` with `ResolveAll` by making `Resolve<T>` validate the evaluated variant against the type of the `defaultVariant`.
* **API Extension with Explicit Flag Type:** Introduce an optional `flagdType`property to the flag definition to serve as the authoritative source for type validation.

## Proposal

This proposal is to extend the flag definition with an optional `flagdType`property. This approach is chosen over simply aligning the `Resolve<T>` and `ResolveAll` validation because it addresses the root cause of the type inconsistency and provides a more robust, long-term solution.

By introducing an explicit `flagdType`field, it establishes a single source of truth for the flag's type, independent of its variants. This allows for early and consistent type validation during flag definition parsing, preventing type-related errors at runtime.

> The new `flagdType`field will be optional to maintain backward compatibility with existing flag configurations. If the field is omitted, `flagd` will treat the flag as having `object`, and no type validation will be performed against the `defaultVariant`. When the `flagdType`field is present, `flagd` will enforce that all variants of the flag conform to the specified type.

Reviewer 3: Could you add more details about how the validation would work? 

I'm particularly interested in the cases that the literal values set to the variants do not fit with the flag type.  Currently flagd seems to just cast the value to the type, **with** precision lost (this is perhaps more related to the JSONLogic engine impl). 

CC @toddbaert
